Chester Clark by Andrea Hall on November 25th at
Gladewater, Texas concerning the Vietnam War. In
the interest of accumulating knowledge about the
war, I'm going to donate this tape to the Texas A&M
Oral History Collection in the University
Archives. Is that all right with you? What is your
birth date and birthplace? What is your
educational background?
I took the courses at the University of Texas at
Tyler, and at Kilgore Junior College and Tyler
Junior College. And what is your bachelor's
degree in? My bachelor's degree was in math and
physics. And what is your master's degree in? My
master's was math and statistics. I see. Okay, how
and why did you join the military? When I went to
East Texas State at the time, it was East Texas
State Teachers College. And in those days, when
you registered, everybody went to the
auditorium. And you got in the line. You found your
letter above a line. You got in that line and stood
in it until you got up to the front of the table. Then
some counselor guided you in what you would take.
And I had a good academic record of high school. So
my counselor advised me to take several one-hour
courses so I'd have more hours. And one of the
one-hour courses she said take was ROTC. And at the
time, I wasn't sure what an ROTC was, but I took
ROTC. It was a one-hour course. And I found that at
the beginning of my junior year, they would pay me
to stay in ROTC. And at that time, it was a... You
wore your uniform one time a week, which was kind of
neat. And as I went along in the course, I learned
more and more about the military and how it
functioned and enjoyed the course. And at the end
of my junior year, we took a physical. And a lot of
people did not pass physical. I passed it with the
qualifications to be a pilot, which again was kind
of neat. So I stayed in ROTC, and at the end of when I
graduated, I received a commission in the Air
Force. Had it not been for my counselor, Mrs.
O'Neil, I would probably have been in the
military. Wow, what a story. Could you give me a
brief sketch of your military career? Yes, I went
into pilot training, and my basic pilot training
was all in Texas at McAllen Air Force Base in
McAllen, Texas, in the far south part of Texas.
Then I went to my basic training at Lubbock, Texas,
and went through old airplanes like the T-29 and
the B-25. The B-25 being the bomber that was used in
World War II. We were the last class to go through
B-25s. The next class went into the T-33s, which is
jet trainer.
I went to my first flying base was at Savannah,
Georgia, Hunter Air Force Base, and I was flying
KC-97s. That's a refueling plane, the one that
carries the fuel that we refueled B-52s and B-47s
and fighters.
Throughout my military career, I flew the whole
time, flying the KC-97 for eight years until I went
back to A&M to get my master's, and then flying
C-123s in Vietnam. And then after Vietnam, I flew a
similar airplane at the Pentagon, a T-29. OK. Now,
what is your rank or was your rank? At the time I was
in Vietnam, my rank was captain. I retired in 1978
as lieutenant colonel. Right. And what was the
date and place of your tour in Vietnam or any other
tours that you served? Well, I was in the Air Force,
the part of the Air Force called Strategic Air
Command, and we had limited short tours at a lot of
places. And before going to Vietnam, I had been
stationed in Georgia, in Massachusetts, at Otis
Air Force Base on Cape Cod. And during those
periods of times, I had short tours in Greenland
and Iceland and England and Scotland and other
places where we spent like 17 days. So it wasn't
like a long tour like Vietnam. And right after I got
my master's at A&M, I graduated in August of 66 and
received my orders to go to Southeast Asia and to
survival school. And other training took me up to
February of 67. I actually arrived in country the
2nd of February, 1967, and spent almost 12 and a
half months in Vietnam. Okay. And what would you
describe your job or service in Vietnam as? I had
actually a split tour. I was in Saigon at Thompson
Air Force Base for six months serving as a wing
safety officer. I did not have the qualifications
to be a safety officer, but I was trained on site and
served as a safety officer up until the time that my
actual boss left country. And then I could not take
his place. And when the people came in to take his
place, they also brought one in to take my place. So
I spent six months at Tan Sanut flying with the 19th
Air Commando squadron and serving as the 315th Air
Command Wing safety officer and then I was
transferred to Fan Rang where I flew the same
airplane but as an aircraft commander. Alright,
now how were you or your unit involved in fighting?
We were, the C-123 was a cargo airplane and we
hauled everything in Vietnam. We hauled
vegetables, we hauled ammo, we hauled People, we
hauled families, we hauled families, their
belongings, whatever needed to be transported,
we transported. We were unarmed. There was no
weaponry on the airplane itself. And every time
that we were flying to a field, and when I say field,
I don't mean two miles of concrete. I mean a field.
The C-123 was assigned to land on dirt. And we
landed at a lot of dirt strips. And the 123 was an
airplane designed to land right at stall speed,
which means that you'd make a very, very steep
approach into the place that you were landing at a
very, very low rate of speed. So when you hit the
ground, you kill the throttles and stopped almost
immediately. Well, flying at a very, very low rate
of speed meant that you were very subject to being
shot at. And we took a lot of hits that were towards
the back of the airplane.
that that was the if you talk about combat for
shooting that was the combat now we did fly in a lot
of areas where you know shells were being lobbed in
and shots were going out we were in that kind of
combat but we were not the we were not the fighters
if you will we were involved in what other people
were doing around us all right now we already
talked a little bit about your training before you
went to vietnam do you feel like you were
adequately trained to go to vietnam For the job I
did, yes. Now, I wasn't trained to be a safety
officer, but I didn't know I was going to be a safety
officer until I got there, and they didn't know I
was either, so that doesn't count. But for the
flying I was doing, my training was in Florida at
Herbert Field, and I trained with Vietnamese as
well as with instructors who had been to Vietnam.
The problems that we had were not problems that you
would even think about. The airplane itself had
flying characteristics that didn't lend itself
to a short person. The Vietnamese were short
people. So we were trained to fly with, to handle
those kinds of characteristics that people might
have. For instance, we were not only carrying
cargo, we were also a drop plane where people
bailed out of the plane. And in several of the drops
that we made, the Vietnamese were not heavy enough
to make their parachutes go where they wanted them
to. So we had to learn that if you were dropping
Vietnamese, you had to drop them at a different
point than you would drop in America. Because they
would float so far. And later on, I will tell you
about dropping some Vietnamese into the bay at Cam
Ranh Bay. We actually dropped them in the water.
And they continued to drift beyond where we
planned to drop them. All right. How did you
perceive military leadership in Vietnam? When
you think about leadership, and you can think
about the president or the commanders or
whatever, but the leadership that I was most
familiar with that I can really address is my
immediate leadership. I was not really affected
by the decisions being made by the army
commanders. My job was based on flying supplies
where they were needed in Vietnam. And that need
was, it was like, you know when you get up in the
morning, there's certain things you do to get
ready to go outside. Well, our job in Vietnam for
flying supplies was well known. You just, you're
only, all I had to know was, where are they and where
do they go? So my orders were, could have been given
by anyone because the need was there and we saw it.
And we flew anything from bob wire, which was
served as a constant wire around the camp, to
stakes to hold it down, to
vegetables for the food for the people, because
that's a tough thing to get in country.
We had other missions that involved doing things
like even flying bodies back to Saigon where the
mortuary was. So it was a very, you did what needed
to be done. It encompassed many things. Without
someone having to say, today you will. Okay.
During your tour, did you encounter any drugs
within your unit or among fellow servicemen? No
drugs like you mean drugs. But the drug that we
encountered the most was alcohol. And the problem
that I personally had, I was a captain. I had been in
the Air Force 12 years at the time. I had a good
flying record. And from the write-ups that I had,
that I can look back now, and from remembering what
I did, I was very proud of my ability to fly the
airplane. A lot of people, and as I got older and
still flew, I realized how my limitations were
creeping up on me, how my reflexes were not as fast.
I could not do things as quickly. And some of the
people that we had in Vietnam were sent straight
from a desk to Vietnam to fly. These were
lieutenant colonels that had served in combat,
had good records, but suddenly were thrown into
another combat situation that they didn't want to
be in. that they, it's not that they didn't want to
be in Vietnam, they didn't want to be in a combat
situation. They did not object to going to
Vietnam. But once they were there, they knew they
couldn't perform like they could in the past, or
like we were, like the younger people were
performing. And they turned to alcohol. And quite
often, someone, in order to get there, to be ready
to fly, they would have to drink the night before to
be ready to fly the next morning. And that didn't,
That bothered me because there were people who
were not drinkers before they arrived in Vietnam
who were alcoholics when they left. During your
tour, did you encounter many people who were
trying to capitalize on the war? The
Americans that would, quote, capitalize on the
war were... were ones who were taking advantage of
something that they gave each of us to. And I did it
myself. We could invest money in a savings account
at, at the time, a 10% interest. Now, at the time,
that was a good interest rate. It's nothing now,
but it was then. And we had people that you could put
in $10,000 into a savings account at 10% interest.
But that was limited to $10,000. If you extended
your tour of duty, you could invest another
$10,000. So the people who were taking advantage
of that, if you will, were single airmen or single
enlisted that would continue their tour. I know
that's not your question, but that is a way that
people were, quote, taking advantage of the war.
As for prolonging it for any personal gain, I
didn't see anyone doing that, either Americans,
Vietnamese.
There was black market. There were things that
happened that some supplies and things that we
couldn't get, you could buy on the black market,
which kind of makes you feel like we're here. We're
here, quote, fighting for these people. Why don't
they just give it back and let us have it? And an item
such as sunglasses, you couldn't get it through
the regular PX or through the base supply, but you
could out on the black market at downtown Saigon
and buy a pair. three or four or five times as much
for them as they would from the PX. But electronic
gear. Now, in the middle of a conflict, in the
middle of a war, in the middle of a place where
people were dying, it seemed stupid to think that a
tape recorder or a tape deck or speakers would be a
big item. But they were. These things were black
market items. And some of the stories that were
told that when the PX equipment would arrive at the
base, most of it would be siphoned off and go
downtown before it ever reached the base. I didn't
see that happen. I was not in a position to see that
happen. I did see American goods and military gear
downtown for sale. I don't know how it got there,
but it got there. Someone did profit from this, as
we know from some of the people later on, some of the
supply sergeants who later on were caught and
prosecuted for dealing in the black market. Do you
think Vietnam escalated careerism among
officers? Not per se. It did help you in your
career. And for me, the first thing that helped me
in my career, as a lieutenant going through pilot
training, the first rank that you would make after
first lieutenant would be captain, and normally
captain was in seven years. I made captain in five
and a half years because they changed the rules.
That was a career move for me, per se. An Army major
was made in about 17 years. I made a major in less
than 12 years because that was how they changed it.
Now, I became a regular officer because at the time
they were promoting to regular officer. It wasn't
a promotion. Being a reserve officer, regular
officer meant different things to you. Mine meant
that I could retire 20 years with full benefits, if
you will.
When I made captain and then made regular officer,
the criteria that was looked at was your
educational background. I had the educational
background that they were looking for at the time.
It didn't matter that it was in math and physics. It
mattered that I had it because people with the
music background, with veterinarian
backgrounds, with whatever background, made it
because of the education. When I made major, they
were looking at an educational level, which was a
master's, and they were looking at Vietnam
experience. I had both, so I made major. It's not
that I went to Vietnam to help my career, but by
being in Vietnam, it helped. And then I had a
Pentagon tour, which helped me to make Lieutenant
Colonel. So the promotions were, I didn't do those
things to make the promotions, but the promotions
were helped by them. And Vietnam helped. did help
commanders make decisions. Who would receive
different ranks. When you were in Vietnam, did you
know who the enemy were? I did, and it was very
difficult sometimes to accept the fact that as a
Vietnamese living in Vietnam, some of the
farmers, merchants, ranchers, wherever were
there, they really didn't care who was in control
of them. They just knew that if the Americans were,
then they kept all their money that they made. They
kept all their crops. They knew if the North
Vietnamese were, then they gave up their money.
They gave up their crops. But they kept their life.
They lived either way. They'd get along with you if
you invade today. They'd get along with me if I'd
run you out today.
Sometimes the farmers would... would take sides,
if you will. And when one particular mission we
were flying, we flew over a pretty green valley in a
little stream. And it was a farmer out plowing his
field. And we stayed low on purpose, which you
normally didn't do. And we stayed low on purpose.
As we flew over, the farmer, he waved, we waved, and
then we made a circle and came back. And he dropped
his plow and ran over to the tree and picked up a gun
and shot at us as we made our next pass by, which the
weapon he was using was like a .22, and the shell
that came out of it was like a .22, but it wasn't a
.22. It wasn't very accurate or precise. In fact,
it was something that they looked like they had
made themselves, like a ball that would be made for
an old gun. But to us, it was kind of, I don't know how
you take someone shooting at you, but we just
cracked up laughing because here's this farmer.
And we flew over one time, and I don't know if we
disturbed him and flew the next time. But we were
the enemy to him at that time. He was just outside of
Benoit Air Force Base and was being protected by
the military there. But we became the enemy to him
then as we flew over. But as for being in an actual
firefight and having to look at this one and say,
oh, your eyes sloped this way, therefore you're a
bad Vietnamese, or this way you're a good
Vietnamese. If you had to pick out the enemy...
from a lineup, you'd never pick it out. I don't mean
to say that all Chinamen are laundry people, but
the Vietnamese did look the same. They could be a
communist today and non-communist tomorrow,
depending on who was in power. Could you tell me
about the time you stayed in the hotel that was run
by the Viet Cong? My first place I stayed in Saigon
was in a hotel. And it was all military in the hotel.
And my first week in country, I bought a camera like
everybody buys a camera. And we, was being
martyred one night. And when the base is being
mortared, they put up flares. And they have Puff
the Magic Dragon was a C-47. It had a machine gun
mounted inside of it. And they would put up flares
that would illuminate the area. And the C-47s
would fire. Every third bullet would be a tracer
that you could see. So the mortars were coming in
this way. The flares were being put up. And the
C-47s would fly in a tight circle and shoot in an
area. It would look like a Christmas tree, the way
the tracer shells were showing up in every third
one. I was on top of my building taking pictures. of
this, and the kid that was with me, my roommate, was
Joe Driscoll. And Joe and I got very tickled at
this. Here we are in the middle of a combat zone,
taking pictures of the base that we're stationed
at being mortared by, quote, the enemy. And we're
up there taking pictures of it and thinking how
pretty it is. Well, the hotel we were in was right
next to an army barracks. And in one of the times
just before I left Saigon, There was a hit on Saigon
itself. There was a hit on the embassy, on the army
barracks, and on several places around us. But our
hotel never was hit. And our motorcycles stayed
down on the porch and were never stolen, never
touched. And we found out later on that our
landlord got on the motel, paid off the Viet Cong,
and was indeed part, you know, he had allegiance to
whoever was in power at the time. And he paid off the
Viet Cong. His hotel was never hit our whole time
there. It's very interesting. What honors have
you, what military honors have you received? In
Vietnam, I received the Vietnamese Service Medal
and the Vietnamese Combat Medal. I received air
medals for my flying. And for one particular
mission that we flew on Easter Sunday, I received a
distinguished flying cross. All right, can you
explain to me what each of these honors means? The
Vietnamese combat and Vietnamese service medals
are like our national service defense medal. If
you served in the military in the country, you
received those medals. The air medal was reserved
for pilots, Air Force pilots who flew a certain
number of missions or certain types of missions in
country. And the missions that just before I
arrived in Vietnam, for each mission that a pilot
flew, each time he took off and landed counted as a
mission. And for 35 missions, a pilot would
receive an air medal. They changed this to be 35
days of flying, a mission being from that morning
till that night, rather than 35 missions. Because
in some of the missions that we would fly, you would
fly like a 20-minute hop from one place to another,
and you'd fly that all day long. And on one
particular day, you might fly 35 or 40 of those hops
back and forth, back and forth, which would have
meant an air medal. So some people were leaving
country as I arrived with 10 and 12 and 14 and 15 air
medals. When I changed it to 35 days, that meant
that in a year's time, you were going to get and
maybe four or five air medals. So an air medal was
for flying a particular kind of mission. The
Distinguished Flying Cross was for a mission
above and beyond the call of duty. And our
particular mission was a very, it started off as
just like any other mission. It was a normal type
mission, but escalated into a lot different than
what we thought. We were flying at a place called
Zomcat, And it was fairly safe in the morning. We
were flying in the morning. We had helicopter
gunships for protection. But as the day wore on, we
were evacuating the Vietnamese, the Americans,
and the
mountain yards out of this particular village.
And it was a village associated with a base. It was
about to be overrun by the VC. The gunships were
holding the VC at bay while we took the people out.
We kept loading the airplane up to its maximum and
taking them out. The gunships were overextended
and ran out of fuel and had to return home.
replacement gunships were diverted somewhere
else for a more serious mission so we were flying in
unarmed to haul these people out and on the last
three missions we were actually surrounded by the
vc and we're taking hits as we're taking them out
they're being held off by gunfire from within the
perimeter as we were hauling them out and we put the
last people on board and when you fly an airplane
there's a limit to the amount of weight you put on
the airplane. It's called the design gross
weight. When you exceed the design gross weight,
then the airplane becomes rock and doesn't fly.
Well, the last mission we knew we had very little
time, and we could not make any more runs in.
Because the last four, as we were coming in, you
could watch the perimeter of the base being closed
in on. And we could see how far out the people were.
And they were right up on the, within a couple
hundred yards of the base on our last mission. So we
put everybody on the airplane. Everybody. And it
was kind of interesting. In the middle of all this,
the Americans, it was almost like integration.
The Americans got on the front part of the
airplane. The Vietnamese were in the middle part.
Then the Cambodians in the mountain yards were in
the back. They sat in the back of the bus. And the
cargo compartment of C-123 closes with a ramp that
comes up from the ground, and then a ramp that comes
down from inside the airplane, and they meet. But
we had people on the ramp that goes out of the plane,
and we brought it up. They were actually at an angle
in the back of the plane where that loaded. And we
took off. The dirt strip we were taking off from was
not really long enough to take off from. And as we
took off, we barely cleared the treetops to get
out. And as we took off and circled back, the VC
actually infiltrated where we were and they had
set explosives to blow up the communications
equipment and the artillery they had to leave
behind. They actually infiltrated as we were
pulling out and the things were it was I took there I
was typically American I was taking pictures
because this was blowing up and it was it was it was
it was interesting the last probably all
afternoon all the missions we flew in were based on
this in fact one time one time they ran out of
ammunition So we changed, we diverted from going
straight back and picked up ammo and took it in so
they'd have the ammo to withstand the onslaught in
the afternoon.
What other operations were you involved in that
were successes?
Well, there were some that were more important
than others, but probably not more important in
the end result. One of the missions that I remember
that was a super success was on Christmas Day. We
had been flying, I flew with the Special Forces
most of my, the time I was in country. I started with
them because in Saigon as a safety officer, I would
fly on the weekends. And there we had weekends as
well as weekdays. I would fly on the weekends to
give other people weekends off. And when I started
flying with these people, they were a special
brand of folks, special forces. And one thing that
they were talking about was that they really
wanted for Christmas, they wanted some beer and
Playboy magazines. So on Christmas Day, one of the
missions that we flew was to fly over and drop to
them beer and Playboy magazines. Super
successful mission. The other missions, some of
them, one of the most satisfying missions I had was
one when I really, I was flying out of
That's terrible. I can't remember the name of the
base we were flying out of. Anyway, we were flying
out of one of the northern bases that was a big
supply base, and we were flying into the various
sundry special forces areas, and we flew into one
with the cargo that we were told to take to them. And
the cargo we took to them was steel spikes to hold
down the concertina wire. And we landed, and we
offloaded, and we were expecting them to come out
and say, great, we really need this. And the first
thing we heard was, why the hell did you bring this?
We have, look. And you look over there, and there's
just mounds of steel spikes. And I said, well, the
frag order says steel spikes. Bring it in. They
said, we don't want the steel spikes. Bring us
ammo. We were hit last night. Half the ammo was wet.
It didn't fire. We need ammo. So I went back to the
supply point, and I told the people there, I said, I
don't want to take those. I want to take ammo. And
they said, you can't. This is what it says you take,
and it's what you take. I said, no, that's not how it
works. The commander needs ammo. He needs it now.
He doesn't need to charge. Well, you have to talk to
the major in charge. I remember I was the captain at
the time. So I talked to the major in charge, and he
says, Captain, you'll take what we tell you to
take. I said, no, sir. We won't. And at the time,
since I had been on the wing staff in Saigon, I knew
the commander, and he knew me. And I called him, and
I said, General Brown, I'm not having a problem.
And I told him what the problem was. And he said, let
me talk to the major. And of course, the major was
very upset that the captain said, I'll take this
cargo and not this. It was very satisfying to fly
into that base with ammo. and offload ammo and see
these guys say, we couldn't have stayed last
another night without it. We appreciate your
bringing what we need.